Diagnosis: Contact dermatitis and eczema
Original diagnosis label: Contact dermatitis and other eczema, unspecified cause
Source: mayoclinic
Guideline title: Contact dermatitis
Guideline id: 224
Relevant scenario_ids: 193
Matched alias: contact dermatitis
Original source path: /Users/xiaofanlu/Documents/github_repos/uncertainty-aware-reasoning-agent/experiments/guideline_based_experience/mayoclinical.json

Guideline content

Contact dermatitis
Overview


Contact dermatitis is an itchy rash caused by direct contact with a substance or an allergic reaction to it. The rash isn't contagious, but it can be very uncomfortable.
Many substances can cause this reaction, such as cosmetics, fragrances, jewelry and plants. The rash often shows up within days of exposure.
To treat contact dermatitis successfully, you need to identify and avoid the cause of your reaction. If you avoid the substance causing the reaction, the rash often clears up in 2 to 4 weeks. You can try soothing your skin with a cool, wet cloth and other self-care steps.
Symptoms


Contact dermatitis shows up on skin that has been directly exposed to the substance causing the reaction. For example, the rash may show up along a leg that brushed against poison ivy. The rash can develop within minutes to hours of exposure, and it can last 2 to 4 weeks.
Signs and symptoms of contact dermatitis vary widely and may include:
An itchy rash
Leathery patches that are darker than usual (hyperpigmented), typically on brown or Black skin
Dry, cracked, scaly skin, typically on white skin
Bumps and blisters, sometimes with oozing and crusting
Swelling, burning or tenderness
When to see a doctor
See your health care provider if:
The rash is so itchy that you can't sleep or go about your day
The rash is severe or widespread
You're worried about how your rash looks
The rash doesn't get better within three weeks
The rash involves the eyes, mouth, face or genitals
Seek immediate medical carein the following situations:
You think your skin is infected. Clues include fever and pus oozing from blisters.
It's hard to breathe after inhaling burning weeds.
Your eyes or nasal passages hurt after inhaling smoke from burning poison ivy.
You think an ingested substance has damaged the lining of your mouth or digestive tract.
Causes


Contact dermatitis is caused by exposure to a substance that irritates your skin or triggers an allergic reaction. The substance could be one of thousands of known allergens and irritants. Often people have irritant and allergic reactions at the same time.
Irritant contact dermatitisis the most common type. This nonallergic skin reaction occurs when an irritant damages your skin's outer protective layer.
Some people react to strong irritants after a single exposure. Others may develop a rash after repeated exposures to even mild irritants, such as soap and water. And some people develop a tolerance to the substance over time.
Common irritants include:
Solvents
Rubber gloves
Bleach and detergents
Hair products
Soap
Airborne substances
Plants
Fertilizers and pesticides
Allergic contact dermatitisoccurs when a substance to which you're sensitive (allergen) triggers an immune reaction in your skin. It often affects only the area that came into contact with the allergen. But it may be triggered by something that enters your body through foods, flavorings, medicine, or medical or dental procedures (systemic contact dermatitis).
People often become sensitized to allergens after many contacts with it over years. Once you develop an allergy to a substance, even a small amount of it can cause a reaction.
Common allergens include:
Nickel, which is used in jewelry, buckles and many other items
Medications, such as antibiotic creams
Balsam of Peru, which is used in many products, such as perfumes, toothpastes, mouth rinses and flavorings
Formaldehyde, which is in preservatives, cosmetics and other products
Personal care products, such as body washes, hair dyes and cosmetics
Plants such as poison ivy and mango, which contain a highly allergenic substance called urushiol
Airborne allergens, such as ragweed pollen and spray insecticides
Products that cause a reaction when you're in the sun (photoallergic contact dermatitis), such as some sunscreens and cosmetics
Children develop allergic contact dermatitis from the usual offenders and also from exposure to diapers, baby wipes, jewelry used in ear piercing, clothing with snaps or dyes, and so on.
Risk factors


The risk of contact dermatitis may be higher in people who have certain jobs and hobbies. Examples include:
Agricultural workers
Cleaners
Construction workers
Cooks and others who work with food
Florists
Hair stylists and cosmetologists
Health care workers, including dental workers
Machinists
Mechanics
Scuba divers or swimmers, due to the rubber in face masks or goggles
Complications


Contact dermatitis can lead to an infection if you repeatedly scratch the affected area, causing it to become wet and oozing. This creates a good place for bacteria or fungi to grow and may cause an infection.
Prevention


You can take the following steps to help prevent contact dermatitis:
Avoid irritants and allergens.Try to identify and avoid the cause of your rash. For ear and body piercings, use jewelry made of hypoallergenic material, such as surgical steel or gold.
Wash your skin.For poison ivy, poison oak or poison sumac, you might be able to remove most of the rash-causing substance if you wash your skin right away after coming into contact with it. Use a mild, fragrance-free soap and warm water. Rinse completely. Also wash any clothing or other items that may have come into contact with a plant allergen, such as poison ivy.
Wear protective clothing or gloves.Face masks, goggles, gloves and other protective items can shield you from irritating substances, including household cleansers.
Apply an iron-on patch to cover metal fasteners next to your skin.This can help you avoid a reaction to jean snaps, for example.
Apply a barrier cream or gel.These products can provide a protective layer for your skin. For example, a nonprescription skin cream containing bentoquatam (Ivy Block) may prevent or lessen your skin's reaction to poison ivy.
Use moisturizer.Regularly applying moisturizing lotions can help restore your skin's outermost layer and keep your skin supple.
Take care around pets.Allergens from plants, such as poison ivy, can cling to pets and then be spread to people. Bathe your pet if you think it got into poison ivy or something similar.
By Mayo Clinic Staff
.
